## ðŸ“ Notes useRef and useEffect: DOM interaction
From the docs: useRef returns a mutable ref object whose `.current` property is initialized to the passed argument. The returned object will persist for the full lifetime of the component.

useRef enables us to interact with DOM nodes after they are created from the call to the `ReactDOM.render` method. We can get access to the DOM node when it is "mounted", inside the`useEffect` callback:
```javascript
  const ref = React.useRef();
  React.useEffect(() => {
    const myNode = ref.current
  }, [])
  return <div ref={ref}>Hello world!</div>
```
where `ref.current` or `myNode` is the current div node that, not just the jsx. What I mean by that is that jsx or the `<div>` is syntactic sugar over `React.createElement`. More specifically, we don't create DOM nodes in react, but we create ui descriptor objects (react elements). So the DOM node isn't created until the call `ReactDOM.render` and isn't available until the component is mounted (in the useEffect callback). The react element is already rendered before the component's effects are run, which is why we can run our initialization in the useEffect. 

It's important to cleanup any effects that might lead to memory leaks. If a component that initializes some library in an effect is unmounted without cleaning up, then the node that references it will be left hanging in the user's memory. If we render the component and unmount it multiple times, then multiple instances are created and left hanging. These are never  cleaned up by the garbage collector, so they waste the user's memory. 

```javascript
  const ref = React.useRef();
  React.useEffect(() => {
    const myFooNode = ref.current
    InitFoo(myFooNode, {
      bar: 'bar'
    })

    return function cleanupEffect() {
      myFooNode.kill()
    }
  }, [])
  return <div ref={ref}>My cool foo node</div>
```
or just 
```javascript
  ...
  return () => myFooNode.kill()
```
## Background

Often when working with React you'll need to integrate with UI libraries. Some
of these need to work directly with the DOM. Remember that when you do:
`<div>hi</div>` that's actually syntactic sugar for a `React.createElement` so
you don't actually have access to DOM nodes in your render method. In fact, DOM
nodes aren't created at all until the `ReactDOM.render` method is called. Your
component's render method is really just responsible for creating and returning
React Elements and has nothing to do with the DOM in particular.

So to get access to the DOM, you need to ask React to give you access to a
particular DOM node when it renders your component. The way this happens is
through a special prop called `ref`.

Here's a simple example of using the `ref` prop:

```javascript
function MyDiv() {
  const myDivRef = React.useRef()
  React.useEffect(() => {
    const myDiv = myDivRef.current
    // myDiv is the div DOM node!
    console.log(myDiv)
  }, [])
  return <div ref={myDivRef}>hi</div>
}
```

After the component has been rendered, it's considered "mounted." That's when
the React.useEffect callback is called and so by that point, the ref should have
its `current` property set to the DOM node. So often you'll do direct DOM
interactions/manipulations in the `useEffect` callback.

## Exercise

Production deploys:

- [Exercise](https://react-hooks.netlify.app/isolated/exercise/05.js)
- [Final](https://react-hooks.netlify.app/isolated/final/05.js)

In this exercise we're going to make a `<Tilt />` component that renders a div
and uses the `vanilla-tilt` library to make it super fancy.

The thing is, `vanilla-tilt` works directly with DOM nodes to setup event
handlers and stuff, so we need access to the DOM node. But because we're not the
one calling `document.createElement` (React does) we need React to give it to
us.

So in this exercise we're going to use a `ref` so React can give us the DOM node
and then we can pass that on to `vanilla-tilt`.

Additionally, we'll need to clean up after ourselves if this component is
unmounted. Otherwise we'll have event handlers dangling around on DOM nodes that
are no longer in the document.

### Alternate:

If you'd prefer to practice refactoring a class that does this to a hook, then
you can open `src/exercise/05-classes.js` and open that on
[an isolated page](http://localhost:3000/isolated/exercise/05-classes.js) to
practice that.

## ðŸ¦‰ Feedback

Fill out
[the feedback form](https://ws.kcd.im/?ws=React%20Hooks%20%F0%9F%8E%A3&e=05%3A%20useRef%20and%20useEffect%3A%20DOM%20interaction&em=kevin.s.kabore%40gmail.com).
