# useLayoutEffect: auto-scrolling textarea

## 📝 Your Notes
useEffect vs useLayoutEffect
Both hooks have the same api, but have different use cases. Let's recall the hooks flow,
particularly, the Mount.

Mount: 1.lazy init, 2.render, 3.update dom, 5.layoutEffect, 6.paint, 8.effects
Update: 2.render, 3.update dom, 4.cleanup layout, 5.layoutEffect, 6.paint, 7.cleanup effect, 8.effect
Unmount: 4.cleanup layout, 7.cleanup effects

1. Run lazy initializers (functions passed to useState and useReducer)
2. Render 
3. React updates DOM updates 
4. Cleanup LayoutEffects
5. Run LayoutEffects 
6. Browser paints screen 
7. Cleanup Layout effects 
8. Run Effects

The difference is that layoutEffects run immediately after React has completed all DOM mutations, and before
the browser paints the screen. This is useful if we want to make DOM measurements (ex: scroll position), or 
style updates and then trigger a DOM update or a re-render by updating state. We can mutate the DOM via a node
ref. If that mutation will change the appearance of the node (paint), then that's when we `useLayoutEffect`.

One exception is: we're updating a value like a ref, and we need that before any code runs.

- useEffect: 99% of the time; If the effect doesn't directly interact with the DOM or are unobservable on the DOM
- useLayoutEffect: If we need to mutate the DOM and/or do need to perform measurements (scroll or window size)
## Background

There are two ways to tell React to run side-effects after it renders:

1. `useEffect`
2. `useLayoutEffect`

The difference about these is subtle (they have the exact same API), but
significant. 99% of the time `useEffect` is what you want, but sometimes
`useLayoutEffect` can improve your user experience.

To learn about the difference, read
[useEffect vs useLayoutEffect](https://kentcdodds.com/blog/useeffect-vs-uselayouteffect)

And check out the [hook flow diagram](https://github.com/donavon/hook-flow) as
well.

## Exercise

Production deploys:

- [Exercise](https://advanced-react-hooks.netlify.com/isolated/exercise/04.js)
- [Final](https://advanced-react-hooks.netlify.com/isolated/final/04.js)

There's no exercise for this one because basically you just need to replace
`useEffect` with `useLayoutEffect` and you're good. So you pretty much just need
to experiment with things a bit.

Before you do that though, compare the finished example with the exercise.
Add/remove messages and you'll find that there's a janky experience with the
exercise version because we're using `useEffect` and there's a gap between the
time that the DOM is visually updated and our code runs.

Here's the simple rule for when you should use `useLayoutEffect`: If you are
making observable changes to the DOM, then it should happen in
`useLayoutEffect`, otherwise `useEffect`.

## 🦉 Feedback

Fill out
[the feedback form](https://ws.kcd.im/?ws=Advanced%20React%20Hooks%20%F0%9F%94%A5&e=04%3A%20useLayoutEffect%3A%20auto-scrolling%20textarea&em=kevin.s.kabore%40gmail.com).
